Title: Yeast and a bountiful harvest of fall pumpkins
Date: 2015-10-27 10:42
Author: monsterbashseq
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 1357
Status: draft

<div>

By [Lisa Cohen](https://monsterbashseq.wordpress.com/) and [Peter
Cohen](http://www.alliancebioe.com/dr-cohen-2.html)

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

[![](http://img2-3.timeinc.net/people/i/2014/sandbox/news/141013/charlie-brown-1024.jpg){.alignnone
width="274"
height="206"}](http://abc.go.com/shows/movies-and-specials/listings/its-the-great-pumpkin-charlie-brown)

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

It's fall, and many tasty options of pumpkin beers are available on tap
and in bottles. If you don't like sweet beers, no problem. Pumpkin beers
come in all flavors and types, dark, spicy, light, hoppy. Some
examples: [Dogfishhead](http://www.dogfish.com/brews-spirits/the-brews/seasonal-brews/punkin-ale.htm), [Southern
Tier](http://www.stbcbeer.com/seasonals/seasonal-imperial/pumking-beer-page/), [Ninkasi
(stout)](http://www.ninkasibrewing.com/delicious/beers/rare-and-delicious-series/imperial-pumpkin-sleighr.html?ageVerified=defaultValue). Shout
out to our neighborhood favorites [Intracoastal Brewing
Company](http://intracoastalbrewingcompany.com/beer_type/on-tap-now/)
(Melbourne, FL) and [Hourglass
Brewery](http://thehourglassbrewery.com/cheers/beer-type/stupid-pumpkin-face/)
(Orlando, FL).

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

[![22377169687\_f9df7ab3c5\_o](https://monsterbashseq.files.wordpress.com/2015/10/22377169687_f9df7ab3c5_o.jpg?w=300){.alignnone
.size-medium .wp-image-1444 width="300"
height="197"}](https://www.flickr.com/photos/lpcohen/22377169687/)

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

We were wondering, what are pumpkin beers? It seems that there are more
options for pumpkin beers these days compared with the past. We thought
we'd explore [what beer is](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beer) then
look at where the pumpkin flavor comes from.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

**History of beer**

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Reports of fermented alcoholic beverages date back to the Egyptians in
3000 BC. European breweries are famous for their history of beer, M[onks
in what-is-now-known-as the Czech Republic and Austria cultivated yeast
and methods for brewing beer for hundreds
of years](http://www.prague.eu/en/read-more/history-of-czech-beer-10522),
passing down secrets from one generation of monks to the next. Each
monastery was [known for their own special
flavors](http://www.beertasting.cz/beertasting/) and can still be
[visited
today](http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/06/travel/06Beer.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0).

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

[![](http://38.media.tumblr.com/d23c14627dfee87e5acf42a3a47d7fb3/tumblr_inline_nj3cxhgoPX1rqc9nd.png){.alignnone}](http://get-to-know-cz.tumblr.com/post/51914841836/history-of-beer-in-the-czech-republic)

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Today, it's pretty easy for anyone to make their own beer. If you're
considering making your own beer, there are many books and references on
the topic (some listed at the end). People are getting creative!
Brewmasters with small craft beer businesses are popping up everywhere
with some tasty beers. In 2014, the independent brewer's association
reported a 30% increase in revenue and even more already in 2015. There
is a market for craft beers, which are unique and flavorful. And pumpkin
beers are no exception.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

**What is fermentation?**

</div>

</div>

<div>

[![](https://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/fromdnatobeer/exhibition-interactive/fermentation/alternative/fermentation-05.jpg){.alignnone
width="250"
height="141"}](https://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/fromdnatobeer/exhibition-interactive/fermentation/fermentation-alternative.html)

</div>

<div>

<div>

Here's a short explanation of how alcohol (ethanol) is produced from
sugar. Bear with us, there's some chemistry. It's not a big deal, and
knowledge of these details is not necessary for making beer, but - since
we're both chemists - we think it's cool.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Everyone learned about the chemical composition of simple carbohydrates
in high school biology, e.g. glucose (C6H12O6):

</div>

<div>

<div>

[![](http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/structure9/167/mfcd00063774.eps/_jcr_content/renditions/mfcd00063774-medium.png){.alignnone
width="100"
height="112"}](http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/structure9/167/mfcd00063774.eps/_jcr_content/renditions/mfcd00063774-medium.png)

</div>

</div>

<div>

Table sugar, like what we put in coffee and use for baking, is just two
of these carbohydrates stuck together: C12H24O12. For beer, most people
use [malted barley](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malt), which is a dry,
aged barley plant. Plants contain starch and cellulose, which are
complex carbohydrates called polysaccharides, long chains of glucose
monomer units stuck together over and over again (n = number of
repeating units):

</div>

<div>

[![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/71/Amylose_3Dprojection.corrected.png){.alignnone
width="266"
height="128"}](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/71/Amylose_3Dprojection.corrected.png)

</div>

<div>

The malting process allows the tough capsule of proteins in the grains
to break down, releasing sugars from the pollysaccharides.

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

[![](http://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/commgallery/Commodities/6_rowed_malted_barley_big.jpg){.alignnone
width="233"
height="131"}](http://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/commgallery/gr_sixrow.aspx)

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

The malted barley gets boiled and reduced down into a thick syrup like
molasses, which contains tons of simple sugars. The glucose in this
syrup gets broken down further into 2 three-carbon molecules through the
10 steps of glycolysis, where each step requires a different enzyme. All
steps of glycolysis are shown below. It looks complicated, but really
isn't. Just think of it as a series of atomic rearrangements, each
facilitated by a different enzyme protein. The enzymes used during this
process come from the yeast or other microorganism, which use the
glucose as food to survive.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

It helps if you think about these molecules all moving around in the
syrup solution, running each other at certain temperatures depending on
their concentrations, volumes, and pressures with the microorganisms and
their enzymes. For every molecule of glucose, 2 molecules of pyruvate
get produced:

</div>

<div>

[![](http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu/@api/deki/files/39316/GlycolysiscompleteLabelled.2.png?revision=1){.alignnone
width="504"
height="293"}](http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu/@api/deki/files/39316/GlycolysiscompleteLabelled.2.png?revision=1)

</div>

<div>

If there is oxygen, respiration will continue to create ATP for the
microogranisms. If there is no oxygen, pyruvate will be decarboxylated
by the pyruvate decarboxylase enzyme:

</div>

<div>

[![](http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/bb450/fall14/stryer7/16/unnumbered_16_p467.jpg){.alignnone
width="340"
height="104"}](http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/bb450/fall14/stryer7/16/unnumbered_16_p467.jpg)

</div>

<div>

Carbon dioxide (CO2) comes off as a bi-product of that reaction along
with acetaldehyde, which is then reduced and rearranged by the yeast's
alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme to produce - here's the big moment
- **ethanol!**

</div>

<div>

[![](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/11/Ethanol-3d-stick-structure.svg/220px-Ethanol-3d-stick-structure.svg.png){.alignnone
width="189"
height="124"}](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/11/Ethanol-3d-stick-structure.svg/220px-Ethanol-3d-stick-structure.svg.png)

</div>

<div>

The term "alcohol" is really just a hydroxyl group stuck to a carbon
molecule. Not to be confused with other alcohols, such as isopropanol
(rubbing alcohol).

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

**Evolution of microbial fermentation**

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

We love our little domesticated yeast microbes. [And they love
us](http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2013/02/07/171384920/when-the-microbes-are-happy-the-brewer-is-happy).
We use these microorganisms for their enzymes, feeding them the glucose
from the malted barley syrup. They produce stuff, and in exchange we
keep them alive in culture for the next batch. We select for batches
that are tasty and throw away the batches that don't work.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Common fermentation methods
include [mead](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mead) (fermented honey),
[sake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sake) (fermented rice), cider
(fermented apples), and beer (barley fermented with yeast). Some of
these take advantage of natural endogenous microbes originating from
within the fruit to break down the sugar into ethanol.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

High-throughput DNA sequencing is recently allowing us to examine the
evolutionary relationship of yeast microbes. Along the way, on the road
to domestication, we have positively selected genes in these
microorganisms. This has resulted in functional differences between
species. In a study of the domesticated fungal species used for sake
fermentation, [Gibbons et al.
2012](http://ac.els-cdn.com/S0960982212005866/1-s2.0-S0960982212005866-main.pdf?_tid=dbe9646c-859d-11e5-b3b6-00000aacb35f&acdnat=1446935055_83fea628b9b06cc0b31caa90ac6f5a87) from
the [Rokas lab at Vanderbilt
University](http://as.vanderbilt.edu/rokaslab/) studied *Aspergillus*
sp. in sake and found genes under selection for flavor.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Yeast for beer has r[ecently been
pinpointed](http://www.molecularecologist.com/2015/08/and-who-made-your-beer/)
as a hybrid species, [*[Saccharomyces pastorianus ]{#named-content-3
.named-content .genus-species}*between *[Saccharomyces
cerevisiae]{#named-content-4 .named-content .genus-species}* and the
cold-tolerant *[Saccharomyces eubayanus]{#named-content-5 .named-content
.genus-species}*](http://aem.asm.org/content/81/23/8202.abstract) by
[Baker et al. 2015](http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/32/11/2818).
Micrograph from a microbiology course lab notebook:

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

[![](https://microbiologyfall2010.wikispaces.com/file/view/b.jpg/186661351/229x164/b.jpg){.alignnone}](https://microbiologyfall2010.wikispaces.com/Alicia)

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Necessary phenotypic features of the species include not producing
toxins humans might be sensitive to, they have a range of thermal
tolerance, aromatic tastiness. We have domesticated, selecting and
affecting the evolution of these organisms for hundreds of years.

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

Functional differences:

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/yea.2960/epdf

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

**How does beer get its pumpkin flavor?**

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

[![](http://drinks.seriouseats.com/images/2011/09/20110930_173049_Homebrew_Pumpkin.jpg){.alignnone
width="223"
height="167"}](http://drinks.seriouseats.com/images/2011/09/20110930_173049_Homebrew_Pumpkin.jpg)

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

In short, the flavor (usually) comes from actual pumpkins. The meaty
squash vegetable is cooked and added during the fermentation process.
Since the pumpkin is a plant, it contains complex carbohydrates also
just like the barley. This feeds the yeast more sugar in addition to the
flavor from the pumpkin. You can use canned pumpkin, pumpkin bread, or
even just the spices themselves. Results and flavors vary. [Cinnamon and
other spices are
common](http://beerandbrewing.com/Vh04cxwAAMsAFSW_/article/popular-pumpkin-beer-spices).

</div>

<div>

[![12108176\_1700189513548098\_4816342478694570675\_n](https://monsterbashseq.files.wordpress.com/2015/10/12108176_1700189513548098_4816342478694570675_n.jpg?w=300){.alignnone
.size-medium .wp-image-1378 width="300"
height="300"}](http://cen.acs.org/articles/93/i40/Periodic-Graphics-Chemistry-Pumpkins.html)

</div>

<div>

That's it! Hope you enjoyed this exploration. We sure did. :)

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

**Do-it-yourself beer references:**

</div>

<div>

<div>

http://howtobrew.com/book/introduction

</div>

</div>

<div>

http://fortune.com/2015/03/16/craft-beers-volume-rising/

</div>

<div>

http://fortune.com/2015/08/05/beer-industry-craft-beer/

</div>

<div>

https://www.brewersassociation.org/press-releases/brewers-association-reports-big-gains-for-small-and-independent-brewers-2/

</div>

<div>

https://www.brewersassociation.org/press-releases/craft-brewer-volume-share-of-u-s-beer-market-reaches-double-digits-in-2014/

</div>

<div>

https://www.brewersassociation.org/category/insights/

</div>

<div>

http://www.cnbc.com/2015/07/27/craft-beer-growth-posts-solid-numbers-again.html

</div>

<div>

http://www.homebrewersassociation.org/how-to-brew/beginner/how-to-make-beer/

</div>

<div>

http://allaboutbeer.com/article/pumpkin-beer/

</div>

<div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

**Other References**

</div>

<div>

http://www.homebrewersassociation.org/how-to-brew/beginner/how-to-make-beer/

</div>

<div>

http://accounts.smccd.edu/case/beer.html

</div>

<div>

http://www.epicurious.com/archive/drinking/beer/pumpkinales

</div>

<div>

http://ruhlman.com/2011/01/baking-with-yeast/

</div>

<div>

<div>

http://www.maltosefalcons.com/tech/yeast-propagation-and-maintenance-principles-and-practices

</div>

<div>

http://byo.com/hops/item/1661-yeast-culturing-from-bottles-techniques

</div>

<div>

http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/watch-yeast-live-breathe/

</div>

<div>

http://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/yeast-fermentation-and-the-making-of-beer-14372813

</div>

</div>

<div>

<div>

Comprehensive history of beer
brewing: http://www.wiley-vch.de/books/sample/3527316744\_c01.pdf

</div>

<div>

Handbook of brewing, CRC
press: https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B\_WoJNqmn6wsSEg4NXo3N3p2ZUE/edit?pli=1

</div>

<div>

Oxford companion to
beer: http://www.amazon.com/Oxford-Companion-Beer-Garrett-Oliver/dp/0195367138

</div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

<div>

</div>

</div>
