Title: Dr. Timothy Jegla - Functional Evolution of Neuronal Signaling
Date: 2015-11-23 13:48
Author: monsterbashseq
Category: comparative, physiology, science
Slug: 1520
Status: draft

"What Can Cnidarians and Ctenophores Tell Us?"

[Dr. Tim Jegla, Department of Biology, Penn State
University](http://bio.psu.edu/directory/tjj3)

See recent publication from Dr. Jegla's lab:

Li et al. 2015. [Major diversification of voltage-gated K+ channels
occurred in ancestral
parahoxozoans.](http://www.pnas.org/content/112/9/E1010.full.pdf) [Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S
A.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25691740# "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.")
2015 Mar 3;112(9):E1010-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1422941112 [Supporting
information](http://www.pnas.org/content/suppl/2015/02/11/1422941112.DCSupplemental/pnas.201422941SI.pdf#nameddest=STXT).

His research centers around the evolution of neuronal excitability and
signaling, working to characterize associated proteins to ask, **'How
did the nervous system evolve?'**

What does a neuron have to do in order to signal properly in a network?

Major jobs of neurons include:

-   grow and maintain neurites,
-   find and connect to targets,
-   (his lab is studying) generate and propagate electrical signals,
-   (his lab is studying) establish functional polarity

Traditional view of metazoan phylogeny: Bilaterians (CNS), the first
neurons are seen in coelenterates (Ctenophores, Cnidarians), before that
neither placozoans (lump of cells) nor sponges have nervous cells.

Now (in genome era), this picture has shifted and affects how we
interpret evolution: parahoxozoan group (placozoans, cnidarians,
bilaterians) branched off, separate from ctenophores, separate from
sponges (each different branches of metazoa). What comes first, sponges
or ctenophores? At the [Evolution of
Metazoans](http://spongex2015.sciencesconf.org/) conference, most agreed
that sponges came first.

The focus of this talk is on voltage gated Potassium channels. There are
3 major functional families of voltage-gated K+ channels, which include:
Shaker, Ether-a-go-go (EAG) and KCNQ. How and when did these channel
families evolve?

Electrical excitability features that are unique to each type, e.g. PIP2
hydrolysis getting rid of KCNQ current, PIP2 not required in EAG family,
can be measured in voltage current profiles. *Regulation of EAG family
channels by PIP2 is fundamentally different in its effect on KCNQ
channels. *Intracellular gating domains is what is different in terms of
sequence. roup together with these domains.

Proteins in the Shaker family have a T1 domain, for tetramerization
which allows for functional independence, and mediates
subfamily-specific tetramerization, allowing proteins to mix

By collecting biophysical measurements, evidence is provided that in
place before the split before CNA development (profiles of Shaker, Shal,
Shab and Shaw)

Look at current profile, can tell what species is what.

Unpublished follows:

Shaker family evolution summary, sponges and ctenophores included

Shab Shaw, Shal included in

Prokaryotes have K+ Channel CNDHB, Plants, Ciliate Protozoans

EAG ancestor, Sponges, Ctenophores first to have

Three types, Eag, Elk, Erg developed later in parahoxozoans

KCNQ shows up, most recent, in Cnidarian

Mammals don't have the highest number, fish have most

Split in KCNQ, not in Cnidarians

**Basically, cnidarians had everything they needed for a CNS, before
there was a CNS**

**Regulation, very conserved also.**

Which one is conserved in Cnidarians?

Are basic axonal channels older than dendritic/modulatory channels?

Why late burst of channel evolution?

How do you make polar neurons with functionlly disticnt axons and
dendrites?

Differential trafficking and barriers: difference in microtubule
polarity, cytoskeletal fence. Channels needed to generate potential are
attached. Organizer is a giant neuronal exon Akyrin repeats, Ankyrin G.
Bindign to membrane proteins such as receptors and channels, middle
domians to link to cytoskeletal, from death domain (not known what it's
doing, but its there), then giant exon that is necessary for forming
barrier (8kb ORF) which is crazy! Not something you see every day.

Collaboration with [Melissa Roles at Penn
State](https://rollslab.wordpress.com/)

MT polarity, when did polar neurons with axons an ddendrites evolve? We
know that drosophila has true axons and dendrites. What about
Cnidarians? Labeled neurons. Live imaging of microtubule polarity in
live neurons. GFP labeldd EB1 (plus tip end-binding protein) on
microtubule

[Nematostella](https://www.sciencemag.org/content/317/5834/86.short)
neurons appear non-polar by MT orientation (all axon-like, but not
differentiated in terms of microtubule polarity!)

Nematostells have all channel types, two classes of neurons

unbranched, tri-polar and tetrapolar unbranched, and branched, may
include some polary?

if have polarity, if don't then ancestral process was axon like not
dendrite like.

When did Ankyrin-based AIS barrier? Vertebrate specific. Not found in
tunicates.

Ankyrin in Ciona, 14kb ORF = does have long exon

ORF!=exon, but it is there

Ankyrin has been lost several times

Placozoans, not there, Cnidarians and placozoans not there.

Shifts over Cina and Sea urchin and Vertebrates. Don't see random large
ORFs

Cnidarians long exon is not, don't know if barrier,we do know it does
not have all domains, with 80% identical to us, full ankyrin there

not homologous, ankyrins long expons diverget too rapidly for homology
to be a reliable indicator of common origin

amino acid sequence is not conserved between phyla

exon length varies from 7-14 Kb, some have 2 long expons

amino acid composition bias, \~40% overrepresented Serine ,Threonine,and
negative charge (D,E) in all species - are these phosphorylation sites?

stinging cells associated, reaching out unipolar

A lot of movement in evolution

need to look at other filamentous proteins to see if same bias, is that
what you need to have flexible domain in cytoplasm?

Summary: akyrin based diffusion barrier between bialaterians and
Cnidarians, don't know if clustering channel types

channels diversified and first ankyrin between sponges, ctenophores, and
cnidarians

Don't necessarily need clustering of channels in Drosophila,

 
