Title: Lessons learned as a past grad student, remembering as a new grad student
Date: 2015-07-31 16:56
Author: monsterbashseq
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 978
Status: draft

The following is a personal story from my past grad student experience.
I'm telling this for two purposes: 1.) to potentially help others and
2.) so I can take stock of the lessons I learned back then and not
forget. I'm starting a new graduate program in a few months and want to
get rid of some emotional baggage associated with my past experiences so
that I can effectively move on.

I earned my M.S. degree at UNCW and had a good experience. I had a great
lab and advisor, worked hard, finished in 2 years, and even was 1st
author on a paper. I also had co-authorship from a summer internship I
had as an undergraduate working at the National Institutes of Health.
After graduation, I didn't know what I wanted to do. I considered
staying in my lab, it was a terminal Master's program but a PhD was
being offered and was accepting students for the first time. I could
have stayed, but wanted to also liked field work. My thesis work
required some field work to collect specimens, and this was one of my
favorite activities. I wanted a job where I could do field work and be a
scientist. My comparative physiology topic for my MS didn't qualify me
for conservation or resource management positions, which seemed to be
the job market for field positions. Peace Corps seemed like a good
option. I was sent to Micronesia and assigned to the Yap EPA, where I
had a wonderful experience, great colleagues. They sent me to the Palau
International Coral Reef Center for a NOAA training taught by Dr. Robert
van Woesik.  After I finished my Peace Corps service and was searching
for the next step, I wanted to return to graduate school. I applied to
the University of Hawaii Manoa, got rejected. Communicated with Dr. van
Woesik about his lab, and he offered for me to work with him. I also had
some job interviews, one for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (the
most serious) and a few other smaller companies and agencies. Dr. van
Woesik encouraged me to apply for an NSF GK12 graduate fellowship
offered by FIT, so I did and was accepted. I was accepted to FIT, moved
to Melbourne, FL and started school in the fall.
