Title: Thoughts on the PhD Graduate School Application Process
Date: 2015-08-05 13:46
Author: monsterbashseq
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 982
Status: draft

https://www.flickr.com/photos/lpcohen/19619273464

Not saying my experiences are typical, at all. But have learned a lot
during this process so wanted to share.

Life is about the journey, not about the destination. Life passes you by
while you spend time planning. Hindsight always looks like things are
peachy. There's no roadmap. No right or wrong, but process of inquiry
pertains to science and life.

There are several different ways of applying to graduate school.

One approach is if you know exactly what you want and have a professor
in mind. You apply, they have funding, and you start in their lab and go
through department requirements and only do research in one lab.

Professional degrees might require internship.

The story: I finished my MS degree. I was young, applied to grad school
right out of undergrad and serendipitously ended up in a great lab with
a terrific advisor. He saw my application and needed a student with my
skill set. I had actually applied to work with a different professor,
but she had a lot of students at the time. I had only applied to one
other school on a whim, went for an informal visit, but didn't get in.
It was a do-it-yourself application process. Nothing like the experience
I've had with major universities where I've applied this time around.

I didn't really know what I wanted to do after graduation. My program
was a terminal MS program at a small school, who has since opened up a
PhD program. I worked really hard for my MS. (Side note: I have since
learned that not all MS are the same. Some view the MS degree as a
consolation prize if you fail your PhD or as a stepping stone once you
finish PhD candidacy requirements. This was not the case for my MS
degree, and I make the distinction in my CV by listing the title of my
thesis and citation in a peer-reviewed journal.)

Then, I met a professor when I was in the Peace Corps. I wanted to go
for my PhD, so applied to school where he was a professor and was
accepted. This didn't work out. Did some soul searching, then switched
departments and got a professional management degree. Got married,
worked for a while in state resource management and as a lab tech, skip
4-5 years ahead and I decide that an academic career requires a PhD and
I want to go back to school again. Perhaps because I had a wide range of
interests and experiences, and a family, it was a difficult process of
deciding to go back to school and where. Thus embarking on a 2-year long
process of searching and extensive soul-searching conversations with
friends, colleagues, family. Learned a lot, in hindsight glad I went
through it all.

I have diverse, interdisciplinary interests that do not fit with some
academic settings. Some academic programs have focused interests in
single applications, e.g. biomedical or ecology. It's all about funding.
You can be interested in ideas that are really out there, but unless a
faculty has funding for you to study whatever it is you're interested
in, there's no point. You have to be interested in what you're
interested in, because that's what gets you going in the morning and at
the end of the day.

It was important for me to find the right school. Because of my growing
interests in nucleic acid sequencing, I knew that I wanted a major, R1
research university with a core genomics facility so that I could fully
explore these interests. Smaller universities have fewer instruments and
facilities. I knew this from my experience as a technician at a small
university.

Boiled down to faculty saying to me (paraphrasing) "if you want to go
and learn from program who started a field, go there. if you want to
participate in where we're going in the future, come to this
university." I want to participate and learn from process of where this
school is going in the future.

A current grad student at one school made the observation that you
choose mentors who do what you want to do. I'm interested in education
and training, so I chose to come to this university and study with this
faculty. During an interview, one faculty told me that choosing a mentor
is one of the most important decisions you make in your graduate
career. Relationship continues into your professional career.

-   Wonderful experience
-   applied to 8 schools (all large but each for different reasons)
-   visited 5 schools, accepted to 4
-   not sorry that I didn't get admitted to home state university (UF)
    - their loss, want broader education from a different state -
    undergrad and 1 MS from schools in Florida, time to move on and get
    a perspective from the left coast :)
-   conversations with each person at each school were beneficial
-   met so many wonderful people
-   practice interviewing for faculty positions afterwards
-   interviewed for a bioinformatics position, moved and worked for a
    year
-   interviewing them as much as they were interviewing me
-   highlights included Penn State head of Huck program, really cool
    individual and glad to have met him, 'now you're a member of the
    sand box, get to have fun!' relax, try to see if this is a good fit
    for you
-   really had to envision myself living in the place and see myself as
    part of the program
-   organization and structure of each program was different
-   invited to homes of professors
-   met wonderful people, so kind, MSU at 5 am
-   learned about peppermint ice cream at Penn State
-   Nature, Science, PNAS authors explaining their research articles to
    me! felt so privaleged, almost like going to a conference
-   tough decision
-   ultimately decided on a school and program based on geography,
    climate, progressive faculty with a broad vision continuing to make
    great strides
-   broad-minded institution also, ability to carve out my own niche,
    rather than fitting into a well-established program
-   benefitted greatly from visiting diversity of programs
-   2 schools even willing to defer admission while I worked for a year
-   nerve-wracking process, which seemed almost harder than school
    itself (probably not!), but in hindsight very worthwhile
-   going into first year with a good perspective that this is the right
    place for me. things might work out exactly how I would like, but
    some flexibility will be possible

Point is,

-   soul-searching is required
-   listen to yourself, your gut, and wide cross-section of others
-   be consistent, no "schizophrenic bursts of progress"
-   not everyone goes on straight path to PhD, mine has and continues to
    be winding
-   can, but doesn't have to, be
    miserable, http://karenzgoda.org/2012/06/03/graduate-student-barbie/
-   take time to enjoy life, if you feel like life is unbearable in
    school, don't be there or in academia.
-   plenty of opportunities outside
-   just because you're a certain age, doesn't mean you can't get a PhD,
    in fact more experience the better and more certain for what you
    want
-   grad school doesn't mean you have to go into debt
-   many arguments against getting a PhD
-   also many arguments for getting a PhD

