Title: ASLO Aquatic Sciences meeting - Honolulu, HI
Date: 2017-03-10 00:10
Author: monsterbashseq
Category: MMETSP, science
Slug: aslo-aquatic-sciences-meeting-honolulu-hi-feb-27-to-march-3-2017
Status: published

Aloha!

Last week I gave a
[talk](https://www.sgmeet.com/aslo/honolulu2017/viewabstract.asp?abstractid=29893) on
re-assembling de novo transcriptomes for the
[MMETSP](http://marinemicroeukaryotes.org/) at the Association for the
Sciences of Limnology & Oceanography (ASLO) [Aquatic Sciences
meeting](https://www.sgmeet.com/aslo/honolulu2017/program.asp) in
Honolulu, HI held at the Hawaii Convention Center from February 27 to
March 3, 2017.

Here are links to the latest version of files:

[Re-assembly .fasta files for individual MMETSP
samples](https://figshare.com/articles/Marine_Microbial_Eukaryotic_Transcriptome_Sequencing_Project_re-assemblies/3840153)

[Repository with pipeline code](https://github.com/dib-lab/dib-MMETSP)

Slides:

\[slideshare
id=72784361&doc=lisacohenetalaslomtgtalkfeb2017-170303184506\]

Annotation, expression quantification, and peptide translations are
also [available](https://zenodo.org/record/257410#.WMJRGnTafq0). About
100 annotations are still incomplete because the [dammit
pipeline](http://www.camillescott.org/dammit/) did not finish properly
on our HPC, so I'm in the process of re-doing annotations for these.

It was a good experience presenting to a diverse audience of
oceanographers, tool users and developers in the session on [Advances in
Aquatic Meta-Omics: Creating Tools for More Accurate Characterization of
Microbial
Communities](http://www.sgmeet.com/aslo/honolulu2017/sessionschedule.asp?SessionID=016),
organized by [Brooke
Nunn](http://www.environmentalproteomics.org/brook-l-nunn.html) and
[Emma Timmins-Shiffman](http://emmatimminsschiffman.weebly.com/). Some
good questions and issues came up about the extra content in our
re-assemblies compared to [NCGR](https://github.com/ncgr/rbpa),
contamination, and the need to combine multiple samples from the same
strain into one assembly.

Special thank you to [Harriet Alexander](https://halexand.github.io/), a
postdoc in our lab who was attending the meeting and provided positive
feedback and encouragement before my presentation; my advisor, [C. Titus
Brown](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/) for supporting the trip to the
meeting; to the [DIB lab](http://ivory.idyll.org/lab/) for helpful
feedback prior to the meeting; and, of course, thank you to the Moore
Foundation for supporting this work!

Relevant to pushing limits of institutional high performance computing
clusters (HPC) with this MMETSP data set (1 TB raw data), while I was
away, [Amanda Charbonneau](https://github.com/ACharbonneau) wrote this
wonderful poem:

https://twitter.com/ctitusbrown/status/836336099333021696

![ASLO\_HIconventionctr.png](https://monsterbashseq.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/aslo_hiconventionctr.png?w=396){.alignnone
.wp-image-4689 width="199"
height="354"}  ![LisaCohen\_ASLOtalk.png](https://monsterbashseq.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/lisacohen_aslotalk1.png?w=464){.alignnone
.wp-image-4692 width="303" height="355"}

Overall, I enjoyed the [ASLO meeting (click here for \#ASLOmtg
tweets)](https://twitter.com/hashtag/aslomtg?f=tweets&vertical=default&src=hash).
I thought that it was well-organized and welcoming to a diversity of
participants. In addition to the [full schedule of scientific
talks](https://www.sgmeet.com/aslo/honolulu2017/sessionlist.asp), there
were many inspiring messages delivered to the aquatic sciences community
related to science communication, teamwork, environmental resource
sustainability, and gender issues. In a time of political uncertainty
regarding environmental protection and the sustainability of public
funding for scientific research, it was refreshing to hear senior
scientists in leadership positions speak about these topics in a way
that left me optimistic for the future.

I was filled with joy during the opening plenary to hear [Kalani
Quiocho](http://www.hawaiiconservation.org/what-we-do/our-strategy/building-capacity/conservation-connections/conservation-connections-talk-story/kalani-quiocho) speak
about traditional natural resources management practices in Hawai'i and
other Pacific islands. He patiently explained to the audience the
etymology of several Hawai'ian words,
including [Ahupua'a](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahupuaa) (watershed
areas), which literally means "cairn" + "pig" because offerings were
traditionally made in payment to the chiefs, who were once the watershed
resource managers. After the meeting was over and I drove around the
island, I noticed road signs denoting different Ahupua'a areas all over
the island. This partitioning of land and water resources, local
ownership and management by villages and chiefs is common to many
Pacific islands. From my time as a Peace Corps Volunteer in
[Yap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yap) (which Kalani showed a picture
of in his presentation!), I learned that island cultures and
[economies](http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/W8376E/w8376e05.htm) are
deeply dependent and [tied to their land and water
resources](https://www.sprep.org/). With increasing globalization and
changing climate, [islands are some of the most vulnerable and special
environments in the
world](http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/tar/wg2/index.php?idp=620),
capable of serving as [miner's canaries for
civilization](http://www.ourplanet.com/imgversn/151/falanruw.html).

The science presented at this meeting is all contributing towards a
better understanding and conservation of all aquatic environments. The
technology and -omics tools being developed to analyze a growing
volume of data are essential to be able to interpret signals of
ecological and biogeochemical significance in our changing environments.
I learned about many interesting papers, got some new ideas ideas, and
met new people. I do agree that one of the main benefits of attending
conferences is the energy derived from networking with people and
exchanging ideas.

What a beautiful location to have a meeting.

https://www.flickr.com/photos/lpcohen/33189349921/in/dateposted-friend/

I also saw and learned the name of the [state
fish](http://universityofhawaii.myuvn.com/can-you-say-humuhumunukunukuapuaa/)!
Humuhumunukunukuāpua‘a, the Hawaaiin Triggerfish.

![Humu\_tang.png](https://monsterbashseq.files.wordpress.com/2017/03/humu_tang.png){.alignnone
.wp-image-4934 width="503" height="337"}

Mahalo!
