Title: Genetically-engineered chestnut tree, MCB263 scicomm assignment 2
Date: 2016-01-22 14:04
Author: monsterbashseq
Category: biotech, Grad School, science
Slug: genetically-engineered-chestnut-tree-mcb263-scicomm-assignment-2
Status: published

My tweet post for this week's [MCB263 sci comm
assignment](https://monsterbashseq.wordpress.com/2016/01/14/mcb263-science-communication-via-social-media-assignment/)
is on the genetically-engineered chestnut tree. This is the first
transgenic plant to ever be considered for use in species and ecological
restoration. It is currently under review by the US EPA and USDA.

https://twitter.com/monsterbashseq/status/690641259325599744

[This very well-written
article](http://theconversation.com/new-genetically-engineered-american-chestnut-will-help-restore-the-decimated-iconic-tree-52191)
by [Dr. William Powell](http://www.esf.edu/EFB/powell/) from SUNY
Syracuse explains that the population of [America chestnut
trees, *Castanea
dentata*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_chestnut) in the
eastern U.S. was invaded starting in the early 1900s by a fungal
pathogen, *[Cryphonectria
parasitica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chestnut_blight) *causing a
lethal disease called chestnut blight. [The population was wiped out,
once a dominant canopy ranging from Maine to
FL](http://www.landscapeimagery.com/chestnut.html). American chestnuts
are large trees, of ecological importance providing habitat for
thousands of other species and also providing a source of [carbon
sequestration](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378112709002837). [Efforts
to restore](http://www.acf.org/) this environmentally- and
economically-important species have recently focused on using
biotechnology methods.

I think it is really great to see the application of transgenic
technologies used for environmental restoration purposes.

The transgenic plant was created by adding a single gene from the wheat
plant. Thirty candidate genes were tested for effectiveness in removing
the fungus. The best turned out to one that produces an enzyme called
[oxalate oxidase (OxO)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxalate_oxidase),
which breaks down [oxalate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxalate) that
the fungus uses to form deadly cankers on the stems. The American
Chestnut Research and Restoration Project has a l[ist of reasons why OxO
was chosen as the best gene](http://www.esf.edu/chestnut/genes.htm).

The experiment done to test the effectiveness of the OxO gene is shown
here in this video, comparing the "wild-type" normal American chestnut
plant on the left to the new transgenic chestnut plants:

https://youtu.be/Ty9b1vml5IQ

 

The result is a blight-resistant American chestnut tree that can pass
this trait down to the next generation. The idea is to cross with
cultured chestnut trees allowing the trait to incorporate and diversify,
then plant into the wild and hopefully restore the population.

Tweets from my MCB263 group:

[Stephanie
Fung](https://twitter.com/stephf0716/status/689673348725366784):
development of super interesting method for visually analyzing DNA/RNA
sequences in situ!

[Ryan
Kawakita](https://twitter.com/RyanKawakita/status/690258696526376960):
cells from cow used to make cartilage tissue in cell culture

[Laura
Perilla-Henao](https://twitter.com/HenaoPerilla/status/689518470204026880):
investigation of Italian publications on GMO

[Prema
Karunanithi](https://twitter.com/plants_r_kewl/status/689606338742095872):
temporary sensors for monitoring neuronal activity
